Welcome! In this lecture we are going to be looking at how we can add
velocity to our balls. So you can see here, they're
firing off in different directions, depending on which key I'm actually
pressing.
So the aim is to add some velocity to this ball
that we have just created here. Now that ball is created in the
Instantiate call here. Um, I want
to point out something about functions. So, so far we've mostly
just been calling functions and ignoring, you know, what they
return, and you may not have even realized that
they were returning things, because these ones..these methods here, Update() and Start(),
they don't return anything, that's why we have void at the front. But if we have a different type
at the front, they do return something. So if we go over KeyDown
you'll notice that the type at the front is bool, which is why we can use it in
an if statement, because it is returning something of type bool.
On the other hand Instantiate, if we mouse over it, returns a type
of GameObject, which is the GameObject it creates.
So we can get hold of this GameObject
and call it instance, like so,
and we can do things with this GameObject.
Now what we want to do
is actually get hold of this GameObject's Rigidbody
component. So remember, if we click here we have a Rigidbody
component as one of the components on the BasketBall
GameObject, so that's what we were trying to get hold of. So we can do
that by doing an instance. and then Get
Component. Now what's going on here? What it means is, we're
calling a method like Start() and Update(), but we're calling
it on this particular thing, this object
called instance. And now remember that instances are
created from types and these types can be classes,
like we have for BallSpawner or GameObject as a class.
And it creates an instance or a
object or a thing, and we can
call methods on this thing. So we do that by doing get dot
Rather, by doing a dot and then the name of the method, in this case,
GetComponent. Now there's two versions of GetComponent we could use.
We could use this one, which takes a string to name
the component, but that's not particularly nice to take
a string to name "Rigidbody", for example, because
the compiler can't tell whether this is correct or not.
Instead, a better version is to do a GetComponent
with these angle brackets and Rigidbody.
So that says get me the component
that is of the type Rigidbody. Then we need...
It'll be complaining about the fact that we are not
putting any brackets here, so put the brackets there.
And now if we look at this you'll see that it's very clever, because
we've asked for a Rigidbody, the type returned from GetComponent.
is also a Rigidbody. So we can assign this
to a variable. I'm going to call
it rb, short for Rigidbody, and
then, we can use the Rigidbody, so Rigidbody dot.
Let's see what fields and methods we've got here.
So you can see drag instantly. Drag is something we saw in
our Editor. So you can see how these two start to link up, the Editor shows
components and it shows the fields from our
objects. But there are some objects that aren't in the Editor, so
for example, we have velocity. That's the one we want to
have a go at! So what are we going to add velocity to?
Well we could set it to 5. Let's see if that works!
Hmm what's wrong with this? it's saying cannot convert
from int to Vector3. OK Vector3 looks
very familiar, it looks a lot like Vector2 and it is!
[Laughs] So we can do Vector3 dot left, for
example, and this gives us the left vector in 3 dimensional
space. So let's have a go at that, let's see whether that has added any velocity
onto our ball!
There we go! You could see that there was
some initial velocity going on, as we create
our balls. Perfect!
So your challenge for this slide, use a different
key, use different keys for velocity!
So by this I mean, use different Arrow keys to choose the velocity direction. So if
I go forward then the ball should be projected forward, by a
hit left then it should go left, etc. And you can
use the knowledge that you've used for previous key presses and the
different ways that Vector.up, down, left, right, forward, backwards,
etc. to create those different velocities.
Then, the next thing I want you to do is to increase the velocity to something more noticiable.
You saw that velocity was barely notable, so I would like you to see if
you could figure out how to increase the velocity. Maybe you need to increase the length
of the vector, so that's the hint. The hint is that you can multiply Vector3 by
floats. Now see what that does, have a go, and
just share in the discussions what you managed to achieve.
Oh and just as another quick hint! Don't worry too much, if
you have to violate the DRY Principle in order to achieve this, you may have to
based on your knowledge of C#, because you may not know enough of the
constructs to do this just yet.
OK pause the video and have a go!
OK welcome back! We are going to
dive right into this! So first things first!
We want to respond to different key presses, so the first
thing I'm going to do is this Rigidbody. I'm going to need that everywhere, so I
will actually need to just do something
slightly different here, because you
notice that we have one if statement. If I create a
second if statement, let's make this really obvious what the problem is. If I do an
else if,
like so, and if I do a Key
Code, let's say, Left
Arrow or ArrowLeft...
We've got LeftArrow and Right
Arrow like so. Now, you'll
notice that we instantiate the prefab in here,
but what we want to do is instantiate it if any key is
down. So how do we go about doing that, that's a little bit
more interesting isn't it? We need..what we need to do is
create a new function, so we won't be doing that yet in this lecture
but we'll be doing it in the next one. So, for now, we're going to put up with the
repetition, but I want you to think ahead and think that in general
we do not like repetition in code. So doing this
is generally a bad idea, but because you don't know how we can make it a little bit easier
then we won't do it right now. OK, so we've got left, right.
I want a forward... Or is it...
I want UpArrow and I want
DownArrow, and this is going to correspond to different vectors,
so I want the right vector here. And for this one, I actually want the
forward rather than the up vector, and you'll see why in a second.
And I'll do it here too, I want the down arrow.
So actually, I don't want down I want back.
So these are all different vectors
pointing in the different dimensions of space. So
I will hit play and let's see what...
Ah, so you see we are being able to send them in different
directions, based on... OK so that's going back and this is going forwards.
Perfect! So we're able to send our balls
in different directions, depending on
how we press our arrow keys. Great! This game is starting to look
more and more fun, but I said I also wanted to increase the velocity.
And this we can do just by multiplying by some factor.
And now, because the factor is going to be the same, I'm going to bring it out the front here,
and I'm going to call it float
and velocity
and I'm just going to give it a 5.0f, something
like that. And then we can multiply all of these by
velocity, and all that
does is it make our vector longer. By default, if you click on it, you see
it's one in length, because it's (1, 0, 0),
that's what this vector actually means. You can hover
over it and see. And by multiplying by velocity it essentially just
says, OK that's going to be 5 in length rather than 1 in length,
and essentially it just makes our ball go
that much faster.
So I hit play again!
You can see now, we're really launching those balls out a little bit more than we were before!
Perfect!